Basic version control with git chapter (#208)
ProjectPythia/pythia-foundations: foundations/github/basic-git.md

[Version Control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control) refers generally to systems for managing changes to documents or files. Version control systems let us keep track of what changes were made to a file, when they were made, and by whom. If you've ever used "Tracked changes" on a Word document with multiple authors, then you've seen a form of version control in action (though NOT one that is well suited to working with computer code!).

The need for version control is particularly acute when _working with computer code_, where small changes to the text can have huge impacts on the results of running the code.

Do you have a directory somewhere on your machine right now with five different versions of a Python script like this?

```
analysis_script_OLD.py
analysis_script.py
analysis_script_09122021.py
analysis_script_09122021_edit.py
analysis_script_NEW.py
```

A Version Control System (VCS) like git will replace this mess with a _well-ordered and labelled history_ of edits that you can freely browse through, and will greatly simply collaborating with other people on writing new code.

### What is git?

#### Git is not GitHub

> That's the first thing to understand. GitHub is a web-based platform for hosting code and collaborating with other people. On the other hand, **git is a command-line software package for Version Control**. It runs on your local computer as well as under the hood on GitHub. You need to understand something about version control with git in order to use many of GitHub's collaboration features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's the first thing to understand. GitHub is a web-based platform for hosting code and collaborating with other people. On the other hand, **git is a command-line Version Control System (VCS)** that you can install and run on your local computer. It runs on your local computer as well as under the hood on GitHub. You need to understand something about version control with git in order to use many of GitHub's collaboration features.
```

 Or, consider adding some more content to this file.
```

We can see here that `git diff` finds the line(s) where our current file differs from what's in the repo, along with a few lines before and after for context.

The next step is to add our changes to the "official" history of our repo. This is a two-step process (staging and committing).

## Stage and commit our changes

The `commit` is the centerpiece of the git workflow. Each commit is a specific set of changes, additions, and/or deletions of files that gets added to the official history of the repository.

### Staging

Before we make a commit, we must first stage our changes. Think of staging simply as "getting ready to commit". The two-step process can help avoid accidentally committing something that wasn't ready.

To stage our changes, we use `git add` like this:

```bash
git add sample.txt
```

and now our new best friend tells us

```bash
On branch fix-typo
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
	modified:   sample.txt

```

Now we see that all-important line `Changes to be committed`, telling us the contents of our staging area.

> If you made a mistake (e.g., staged the wrong file), you can always unstage using `git restore` as shown in the `git status` output. Nothing is permanent until we commit!

Reviewer: Would it be wise to expand on this and say that even after a commit nothing is permanent?

Author: I'll add a sentence to the effect of, "if you screw something up, you can always add a new commit that fixes it!"

It is of course *possible* in git to undo or revise a commit, but I consider that beyond beginner usage. The basic idea of the commit is that you're putting something into the permanent record. It's a "measure twice, cut once" situation.

### Committing

It's time to make a commitment. We can now permanently add our edit to the history of our `fix-typo` branch by doing this:

```bash
git commit -m 'Fix the typo'
```

```{note}

> Every commit should have a "message" that explains briefly what the commit is for. Here we set the commit message with the `-m` flag and chose some descriptive text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every commit should have a "message" that explains briefly what the commit is for. Here we set the commit message with the `-m` flag and chose some descriptive text. Note, it's critical to have those quotes around 'Fix the typo'. Otherwise the command shell will misinterpret what you are trying to do. 
```

### Viewing the commit history with `git log`

A simple way to see this history of the current branch is this:

```bash
git log
```

You'll see something like this:

```bash
commit 7dca0292467e4bbd73643556f83fd1c52b5c113c (HEAD -> fix-typo)
Author: Brian Rose <brose@albany.edu>
Date:   Mon Jan 17 11:31:49 2022 -0500

    Fix the typo

commit 35fcbd991f911e170df550db58f74a082ba18b50 (origin/main, origin/HEAD, main)
Author: Kevin Tyle <ktyle@albany.edu>
Date:   Thu Jan 13 11:29:40 2022 -0500

    Close docstring quote on sample.py

commit e56ea58071f150ec00904a50341a672456cbcb8f
Author: Kevin Tyle <ktyle@albany.edu>
Date:   Tue Jan 11 14:15:31 2022 -0500

    Create sample.md

commit f98d05e312d19a84b74c45402a2904ab94d86e45
Author: Kevin Tyle <ktyle@albany.edu>
Date:   Tue Jan 11 13:58:09 2022 -0500

    Create sample.py
```

which shows the last few commits on this branch, including the commit number, author, timestamp, and commit message. You can page down to see the rest of the history!

```{note}
Every commit has a unique hexadecimal checksum code like `7dca0292467e4bbd73643556f83fd1c52b5c113c`. Your history will look a little different from the above!
```

> ### Checking out a previous commit

Reviewer: I feel like this section could use some more information to guide the user with what to do after checking out a past version. The typical uses cases come to mind: 1. the user simply wants to view a previous version **temporarily**, but then go back to the current version. 2. the user wants to essentially undo commits made after the old commit; they want to make an older commit the current version of the code. Maybe call out these two use cases and explain how the second task performed?

Author: Ok, I'll add something along these lines. I think it makes sense to show an example of creating a new branch starting from a previous commit.

Author: I added an enumerated list of those two use cases at the top of this section. I now *mention* the possibility of creating a new branch from the previous commit, but on reflection I don't think it makes sense to lead the reader through this until we cover branches in more detail.

@clyne let me know if you like the latest version, and if so, please go ahead and resolve this conversation and click the Merge button!
